{\rtf1\ansi\deff0
\\b FragmentID\\b0: SCC-DRC2305/CIV017\\par
\\b Outcome status\\b0: Outcome\\par
\\b OH-harvesting period\\b0: harvest 1\\par
\\b coutnry\\b0: DR Congo\\par
\\b Year\\b0: 2021\\par
\\b Outcome description\\b0: Following the training of APRU HRDs in Haut Uélé province in September 2021 and March 2021, 15 trained HRDs under the coordination of APRU and 18 HRDs in Maniema analyse security incidents against HRDs, provide advice to HRDs at risk and refer valid cases to HRD protection service providers.\\par
\\b Significance of the outcome\\b0: Before the training in physical and digital security management, 15 members of Action pour la Promotion Rurale (APRU) and 18 members of Réseau Haki na Sheria Maniema (REHESHEMA) were not able to coordinate the protection of HRDs at risk.  DefendDefenders trained APRU and REHESHEMA members because they had been targeted by human rigths violators such security services,  and Lomami National Park autorities and human rigths abuses such as Kibali Gold Mining Company and Mai Mai Malaika Rebelion. They are now able to deal with the cases of HRDs. They fill in the HRDs' protection request forms well and provide relevant information. They verified the information provided by the HRDs before that information is completed in the forms to be submitted to DefendDefenders and other HRDs' Service Protection Providers for decision-making. Among the 11 cases submitted by APRU to DefendDefenders between 2020 and 2022, 10 were valid and among 55 cases submitted by REHESHEMA to Freedom House, 55 were valid.  \\par
\\b Additional information (use if needed) \\b0: Maniema province is among the provinces with a large number of human rights violations and abuses. The group Mai Mai Malaika has ordered the beating of all women and girls wearing miniskirts, cullottes and trousers.  The beating of women started in 2020 when Mai Mai started controlling the Salamabila area in Kabambare territory in Maniema Province. But the women persecution was sporadic and not systamatic. The witchhunting women and girls wearing trouses, shorts and mini-skirts started in 2021 when Mai Mai rebel group rebranded into Mai Mai Malaika and its leader Sheik Kabala made a public anouncement in village meeting that all women and girls should wear like female muslims. s Human rights defenders who have been denouncing these abuses are targeted by Mai Mai Malaika.  In 2020 and 2021, Kibali  Gold Mining Company and Chinese miners in connivance with the Haut Uélé province authorities targeted human rigths defenders who denounced human rigths concerns in mining areas and the demolition of some trading centres to give land to mining companies. \\par
\\b Rating significance\\b0: large\\par
\\b Social actor\\b0: Engaged citizens\\par
\\b MCQType of change_Policy implementation\\b0: \\par
\\b MCQType of change_Policy change\\b0: \\par
\\b MCQType of change_Supportive action\\b0: \\par
\\b MCQType of change_Community bridging\\b0: \\par
\\b MCQType of change_New structure\\b0: \\par
\\b MCQType of change_Creating space for CSOs\\b0: \\par
\\b MCQType of change_Seeking public support\\b0: \\par
\\b MCQType of change_Capacity change L and A\\b0: \\par
\\b MCQType of change_Capacity change  Safety and Security\\b0: 1.0\\par
\\b MCQType of change_Capacity change Mental health resilience\\b0: \\par
\\b MCQType of change_Gender sensitive\\b0: \\par
\\b MCQType of change_Gender transformative\\b0: \\par
\\b MCQType of change_Womens participation\\b0: \\par
\\b MCQType of change_Other\\b0: \\par
\\b Scale\\b0: Individual\\par
\\b Contribution of the programme\\b0: DefendDefenders trained REHESHEMA and APRU in physical and digital security management in March 2021 and September 2022 respectively.  \\par
\\b Contribution of other actors and factors\\b0: None \\par
\\b Rating contribution\\b0: great\\par
\\b The change was unintended\\b0: \\par
\\b Evidence supporting the outcome statement\\b0: HRDs' protection request forms and HRD protection grant contracts signed by HRDs. \\par
\\b Outcome statements is CONFIDENTIAL\\b0: 1.0\\par
\\b Link to Outcomes in Results Framework \\b0: Outcome 1.5\\par
\\b Link to SCC Specific Objectives\\b0: CIV: Less suppression of civic space\\par
\\b StoryFragment_Merged\\b0: Following the training of APRU HRDs in Haut Uélé province in September 2021 and March 2021, 15 trained HRDs under the coordination of APRU and 18 HRDs in Maniema analyse security incidents against HRDs, provide advice to HRDs at risk and refer valid cases to HRD protection service providers.\line \line Significance description: Before the training in physical and digital security management, 15 members of Action pour la Promotion Rurale (APRU) and 18 members of Réseau Haki na Sheria Maniema (REHESHEMA) were not able to coordinate the protection of HRDs at risk.  DefendDefenders trained APRU and REHESHEMA members because they had been targeted by human rigths violators such security services,  and Lomami National Park autorities and human rigths abuses such as Kibali Gold Mining Company and Mai Mai Malaika Rebelion. They are now able to deal with the cases of HRDs. They fill in the HRDs' protection request forms well and provide relevant information. They verified the information provided by the HRDs before that information is completed in the forms to be submitted to DefendDefenders and other HRDs' Service Protection Providers for decision-making. Among the 11 cases submitted by APRU to DefendDefenders between 2020 and 2022, 10 were valid and among 55 cases submitted by REHESHEMA to Freedom House, 55 were valid.  \line \line Contribution of the programme: DefendDefenders trained REHESHEMA and APRU in physical and digital security management in March 2021 and September 2022 respectively.  \line \line Additional information: Maniema province is among the provinces with a large number of human rights violations and abuses. The group Mai Mai Malaika has ordered the beating of all women and girls wearing miniskirts, cullottes and trousers.  The beating of women started in 2020 when Mai Mai started controlling the Salamabila area in Kabambare territory in Maniema Province. But the women persecution was sporadic and not systamatic. The witchhunting women and girls wearing trouses, shorts and mini-skirts started in 2021 when Mai Mai rebel group rebranded into Mai Mai Malaika and its leader Sheik Kabala made a public anouncement in village meeting that all women and girls should wear like female muslims. s Human rights defenders who have been denouncing these abuses are targeted by Mai Mai Malaika.  In 2020 and 2021, Kibali  Gold Mining Company and Chinese miners in connivance with the Haut Uélé province authorities targeted human rigths defenders who denounced human rigths concerns in mining areas and the demolition of some trading centres to give land to mining companies. \line \line Contribution of other actors and factors: None \\par
\\b TypeOfChangeCluster_Policy\\b0: \\par
\\b TypeOfChangeCluster_Empowering citizens and CSOs\\b0: \\par
\\b TypeOfChangeCluster_Gender\\b0: \\par
\\b TypeOfChangeCluster_Capacity change\\b0: 1.0\\par
\\b TypeOfChangeCluster_Community bridging\\b0: \\par
\\b TypeOfChangeCluster_Mobilizing citizens and organizations\\b0: \\par
\\b TypeOfChangeCluster_Other\\b0: \\par
\\b Outcome is negative\\b0: \\par
}