---
kindle-sync:
  bookId: '27837'
  title: The Sex Lives Of Cannibals
  author: J Maarten Troost
  asin: B003NE5Y42
  lastAnnotatedDate: '2025-08-20'
  bookImageUrl: 'https://m.media-amazon.com/images/I/718ildAURhL._SY160.jpg'
  highlightsCount: 32
date: 2026-01-15
---
# The Sex Lives Of Cannibals
## Metadata
* Author: [J Maarten Troost](https://www.amazon.comundefined)
* ASIN: B003NE5Y42
* Reference: https://www.amazon.com/dp/B003NE5Y42
* [Kindle link](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B003NE5Y42)

## Highlights
Darwin theorized that coral replenishes itself by matching the rate of a sea volcano’s dissolution. As the land far below the water surface steadily recedes into the depths, coral polyps grow from its slopes, seeking the sun, rising first to become a barrier reef, and then, as the volcano continues to disintegrate, slowly inching toward its base, an atoll is formed, the living crest balanced atop layers of dead coral and far below, the volcano itself. — location: [439](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B003NE5Y42&location=439) ^ref-31060

---
4,610 feet into Eneewetak Atoll in the Marshall Islands and struck volcanic rock, that Darwin’s theory was proved correct. It was incidental, however, to the purpose of the drilling. Enwetak was being canvassed as a sight for testing the hydrogen bomb — location: [444](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B003NE5Y42&location=444) ^ref-6475

---
With the Bush (II) administration’s decision to discard the ABM Treaty, even more testing will be conducted in the Marshall Islands. For a country with a total area of less than 120 square miles, the loss of five islands is not insignificant. And so payments must be made. The Marshall Islands had received $800 million of American “aid” over the previous ten years, which amounted to $14,300 for every man, woman, — location: [457](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B003NE5Y42&location=457) ^ref-40667

---
That these peoples took to the seas at a time when Europeans were still exploring the utility of femur bones is staggering, — location: [843](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B003NE5Y42&location=843) ^ref-1483

---
In the bubuti system, someone can walk up to you and say I bubuti you for your flipflops, and without a peep of complaint you are obliged to hand over your flipflops. The following day, you can go up to the guy who is now wearing your flipflops, and say I bubuti you for your fishing net, and suddenly you have a new fishing net. In such a way, Kiribati remains profoundly egalitarian. — location: [1440](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B003NE5Y42&location=1440) ^ref-52030

---
Because of the bubuti system, the I-Kiribati tend to avoid seeking positions of power. — location: [1450](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B003NE5Y42&location=1450) ^ref-6606

---
Within the bubuti system, outright stealing is regarded as a perfidious offense, — location: [1460](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B003NE5Y42&location=1460) ^ref-57366

---
The churches in Kiribati are, without exception, shamelessly coercive. It mattered not whether it was the Catholic Church or the Protestant Church or the Mormon Church or the Church of God, or any other of the innumerable churches to have set up shop on Tarawa; if a family found itself unable to pay their monthly tithe to their church, which typically took 30 percent of their meager income, they were called up to the front of the church by their pastors and loudly castigated for their failure to pay God His due. — location: [1538](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B003NE5Y42&location=1538) ^ref-11585

---
Nauru, a one-island nation of eight thousand people, once had six Boeing 737s. They did not need six planes, of course. But flush with the cash generated by the mining of their phosphate deposits, Nauru set about looking for creative outlets to squander their money. This included financing Broadway shows, supporting the lifestyles of every con man between Taiwan and Costa Rica, buying the world’s most overvalued properties, and maintaining a fleet of six Boeing 737s. No one on Nauru actually worked. The mining of their island was done by I-Kiribati laborers under Australian management. Instead, Nauruans spent their time becoming grotesquely fat. In this they were successful. They are officially the fattest people on the planet. — location: [1610](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B003NE5Y42&location=1610) ^ref-61657

---
In the two and a half centuries that passed after Magellan’s crossing, only five expeditions cruised the Central Pacific, discovering a mere six islands and it is a wonder that it wasn’t fewer. One can see — location: [1685](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B003NE5Y42&location=1685) ^ref-45126

---
the prominent hills of Samoa and Hawaii from many miles away, but to see one of the low-lying atolls of the equatorial Pacific one has to be very close. — location: [1687](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B003NE5Y42&location=1687) ^ref-58911

---
Without recourse to the Global Satellite Positioning system, or—at least until well into the nineteenth century—an accurate chronometer to determine their longitude, it behooved captains to stay close to the known routes across the Pacific. As early as the sixteenth century, Spanish galleons — location: [1693](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B003NE5Y42&location=1693) ^ref-63140

---
laden with gold made frequent crossings between Mexico and the Philippines. — location: [1695](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B003NE5Y42&location=1695) ^ref-48980

---
By the late eighteenth century, there was a bustling fur trade between China and the Northwest United States. But this movement of ships occurred far to the north of Kiribati, which bestrides the equator where maddening doldrums sap the spirits of even the most well-provisioned ships. Sailors learned to fear the heat and windless stagnation — location: [1696](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B003NE5Y42&location=1696) ^ref-4208

---
In 1788, after delivering the very first convicts to Sydney Cove, Capt. Thomas Gilbert of the Charlotte and Capt. John Marshall of the Scarborough were chartered by the East India Company — location: [1711](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B003NE5Y42&location=1711) ^ref-39708

---
On the way, they passed Aranuka, Kuria, Abaiang, Tarawa, and Butaritari. Gilbert and Marshall decided to call these islands the Gilbert Islands. They did this because they could. The next island group they encountered to the north was called the Marshall Islands. Why not, they figured. — location: [1712](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B003NE5Y42&location=1712) ^ref-4656

---
name. Much more interesting are the descriptive names that suggest a story or happening of interest. Captain Cook was pretty good about this. From him, we have Cape Good Success, Cape Deceit, Cape Desolation, Adventure Cove, Devil’s Basin, Great Black Rock, and Little Black Rock, all in Tierra del Fuego, names that suggest that rounding Cape Horn in the late eighteenth century was probably a fairly up and down experience. So too was getting stuck within the Great Barrier Reef—Cape Tribulation, Thirsty Sound, Isle of Direction, Wednesday Island, — location: [1717](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B003NE5Y42&location=1717) ^ref-41451

---
Then they wrapped their bodies in clothes—very strange to the Gilbertese since they were used to going naked. When the strangers put on their shoes the people later compared them to hermit crabs—they hid their feet inside things which looked like shells. — location: [1747](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B003NE5Y42&location=1747) ^ref-31925

---
They lacked fresh food, potable water, gold, silver, spices, fur, fabrics, sandalwood, just about everything that drove trade and exploration during that era. What Kiribati did have, however, was women. — location: [1759](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B003NE5Y42&location=1759) ^ref-14244

---
I-Kiribati women soon became renowned for their beauty, and fortunately for the whalers, some of the islands had a class of women — location: [1762](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B003NE5Y42&location=1762) ^ref-23650

---
The whalers soon discovered that there weren’t that many women of the nikiranroro class and that the licentious reputation of Tahiti was well deserved, and like apparently every other male who rounded Cape Horn in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, the whalers too began seeking most of their entertainment in Polynesia. — location: [1766](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B003NE5Y42&location=1766) ^ref-28870

---
This was good for Kiribati, which was not nearly as afflicted by the epidemic of venereal diseases that racked Tahiti. But, as I can attest, nicotine withdrawal can make one decidedly grumpy. This is why the crew of the Columbia found themselves taken hostage one day by nic-fitting I-Kiribati, who refused to release them until they received one — location: [1769](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B003NE5Y42&location=1769) ^ref-6301

---
By the 1840s, the blackbirders had arrived. These were slavers contracted to obtain labor for the plantations in Fiji, Hawaii, New Caledonia, and Peru. The slavers used both force and deceit to fill their holds. On the friendlier islands, they invited villagers aboard, where they were promptly given rum until the entire village lay passed out on the deck, at which point the crew would quietly sail off with them. At other times, blackbirders raided a village, hunting in particular for women. Said one blackbirder: “They fetch in the Fiji Islands twenty pounds a head, and are much more profitable to the slavers than the men.” According to one account of a raid on Arorae, “thirty-eight young women were all made fast by the hair of their head and led into the boat.” Most never saw their home islands again. — location: [1782](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B003NE5Y42&location=1782) ^ref-25285

---
when one looks at the labor trade as a percentage of a country’s population there is probably no nation that exported more of its people than the I-Kiribati. — location: [1794](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B003NE5Y42&location=1794) ^ref-3696

---
during this era most of the I-Kiribati recruited to work abroad went willingly. Drought — location: [1796](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B003NE5Y42&location=1796) ^ref-9105

---
Most often though, it was a seaman who had made such a nuisance of himself aboard the ship that the captain felt either compelled to maroon him or accede to his wish to be marooned. The first beachcomber known to have set ashore in the Gilbert Islands was one Robert Wood, who arrived on Butaritari in 1835, where he quickly taught the locals how to brew sour toddy, — location: [1811](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B003NE5Y42&location=1811) ^ref-32080

---
The first appearance of missionaries in the Gilbert Islands occurred in 1852 when the American Board of Commissioners for Foreign Missions sent three missionary families to the Marshall Islands. — location: [1829](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B003NE5Y42&location=1829) ^ref-44376

---
As the years went by, the zealotry of the early Protestant missionaries lessened, primarily because on most islands it got them nowhere, but also due to competition from Catholic missionaries, who were amenable to smoking and drinking and dancing, which gave them a powerful competitive edge in the pursuit of I-Kiribati souls. — location: [1868](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B003NE5Y42&location=1868) ^ref-25727

---
Indeed, by the early twentieth century, the northern Gilbert Islands, long the domain of the American Board of Missionaries, had become predominantly Catholic, while the southern Gilberts, which had come under the sway of the more lenient Samoan missionaries sent there by the London Missionary Society, had become largely Protestant, a division that continues to this — location: [1870](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B003NE5Y42&location=1870) ^ref-46845

---
Into this atmosphere of agitated missionaries, unscrupulous traders, and chiefly wars fueled by drink, guns, and delusions, the arrival of the British Empire was not entirely unwelcomed by the I-Kiribati. In 1892, Capt. E. H. M. Davis of the Royalist arrived on Abemama to plant the Union Jack and declare that henceforth the Gilbert Islands would exist as a protectorate of Victoria, by the Grace of God, Queen of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, and Empress of India. He then moved on to every other major island in the group and said likewise. The I-Kiribati said okeydokey, possibly because Davis immediately banned trade in guns and alcohol, and soon went so far as to banish the more obstreperous missionaries, — location: [1875](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B003NE5Y42&location=1875) ^ref-9352

---
The British experience in Kiribati, such as it was, considering that at no time did the British have more than a dozen colonial officers stationed there, might have remained essentially benign were it not for the discovery that on one of the islands there existed an actual, honest-to-goodness, extremely valuable natural resource. — location: [1893](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B003NE5Y42&location=1893) ^ref-35445

---
about thirty people live on the blasted remains of Banaba. The rest of the Banabans were removed to Rabi, an island in Fiji, in the 1950s, when the British realized that phosphate mining had rendered Banaba uninhabitable. — location: [1906](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B003NE5Y42&location=1906) ^ref-22431

---
